---
layout: page
title: About Us
---

The *Complexity in Behavioural Science* (CiBS) group brings together researchers interested in exploring pattern formation and change processes in psychological phenomena. Our approaches are informed by the interdisciplinary framework of complexity science. Complexity science is about studying general principles of pattern formation and change across a wide range of qualitatively different phenomena. The term "complex" reflects the multifaceted, interdependent, and dynamic nature of the systems being studied. All living beings from humans and bacteria to ant colonies and ecosystems, are considered complex systems. Additionally, many non-living systems—such as weather patterns, financial markets, and the internet—also exemplify complexity. What all complex systems have in common is that there is a set of general principles that govern their patterns and transformations. At CiBS, we draw inspiration from interdisciplinary insights, applying them to the study of human behavior. For instance, just as ecologists examine changes in fish populations and meteorologists track and predict the weather, we seek to uncover important principles of change that can inform our understanding of psychological phenomena, including psychopathology, clinical change, motor development, social interactions, and learning.

Our key assumption is that an individual's behavior, thoughts, and emotions emerge from a complex interaction of numerous interdependent biological, psychological, environmental, and societal processes occurring across different timescales. There are no hidden causes or predefined blueprints for these patterns; rather, they are self-organizing emergent phenomena without a single causal influence. Behavioral patterns, such as depression, are not fixed or static; they are dynamic processes that evolve over a person's life through ongoing interactions with their environment, even if some processes change so slowly that they may seem static. The ontological commitment to a complex systems approach prompts important questions about how we understand psychological constructs like psychopathology, clinical change, intelligent behavior, and resilience. They also influence our research approaches. Many traditional statistical assumptions—such as independence, additivity, and linearity—and conventional research methods, like randomized controlled trials with only pre- and post-measurements, are inadequate for studying the contextualized and individual-specific processes of pattern formation and change. Therefore, we often utilize methods that generate time series data, such as repeated self-report surveys (e.g., ecological momentary assessments), physiological data (e.g., heart rate variability), observational data (time-stamped codes from therapy sessions), and cognitive tasks (e.g., reaction times). We also use and develop methods that capture individual-level dynamic patterns, including qualitative research techniques and time series analyses that explore recurrences, stability, context sensitivity, and resistance to change (see the R package [‘casnet’](https://fredhasselman.com/casnet/)).

Anyone interested in studying pattern formation and change processes is invited to join our group, regardless of their specific focus. Current research topics include psychopathology, clinical change, social media usage, learning activities, sleep patterns, parent-child interactions, eye-gaze, sports performance, and dialogue analysis, among others. CiBS group meetings are informal and can involve presenting research findings and ideas, brainstorming, or discussing articles and books we've read together. There is always ample opportunity to ask stupid questions and to engage in thought-provoking discussions.
