---
layout: post
title: How I got into complexity science
subtitle: Merlijn Olthof
---

(this blog is based on the introduction of my dissertation, which can be
read here: <https://repository.ubn.ru.nl/handle/2066/292966>)

### Studying psychology

In 2011, I started my psychology bachelor at the Radboud University
(Nijmegen, The Netherlands) with the aim to learn more about
psychopathology and clinical change. I had my doubts about this
decision, because I also aspired to become an ecologist, but in the end,
psychology appealed more to me than biology. In my first year, I found
the psychology bachelor quite fun, although I did not learn much about
psychopathology. In the second year, I had some courses about
psychopathology, but they were not what I had expected. The courses were
much less interesting than my mother’s stories of working with persons
with psychosis. The things I *did* learn, about diagnostics, clinical
questionnaires, and risk- and protective factors, were often either too
pragmatic or common sense in my view. Overall, I did not feel like I was
gaining a deeper understanding of psychopathology. In hindsight, I
especially missed theories of psychopathology (cf., Borsboom, 2013). I
lost interest in my study and mainly played guitar in that second
bachelor year.

In the third year of the bachelor, the courses became more challenging
with various theoretical models and journal papers to read (instead of
handbooks), which, to my own surprise, motivated me very much to study.
I learned many box-and-arrow models in cognitive neuroscience,
psychobiology, and social psychology. I enjoyed reading empirical
studies with carefully conducted experiments and, especially in the case
of social psychology, sometimes rather funny study designs (e.g., will
people buy more French wine if the supermarket plays French music?). The
models I learned in these courses were complicated, but just simple
enough to be nice ‘puzzles’ (I think this is called ‘the IKEA effect’ in
social psychology). I was quite good at these puzzles and suddenly
started to get high grades, which further motivated me. Most
psychopathology courses were still largely descriptive, without such
box-and-arrow models, and I slowly gave up on my initial ambition to
study psychopathology. I became interested in psychological science, and
at that time, I believed that the field to go for was neuroscience or
social psychology, not psychopathology.

Over the course of the third year, I had two realizations which slightly
bothered me in my newly found scientific interest. First, I had the
feeling that the more components a model had, the better it seemed to
apply to reality. For instance, I recall a model of emotion-processing,
where a 2-dimensional model was extended into a 3-dimensional one, which
then could explain more phenomena. Extending 2-D into 3-D is quite
comprehensive, as you can still visualize and intuitively understand
such a model, but I got worried: wouldn’t then a 4-D model be better, or
a 5-D, or a 6-D? For psychological phenomena, one can always find new
relevant components to add to the model. I was afraid that our inability
to think (and visualize) in high dimensions would be a ceiling to the
scientific explanations that could be made in psychology. The second
thing that bothered me was that all the models and results I learned did
not seem to converge. For instance, I took the course *Neurophysiology
of Cognition and Behaviour*, which sounded very fundamental to me, but
did not have an overarching fundamental theory to connect the topics
discussed in the separate lectures. Although the lack of convergence and
integration was a bit disappointing, it did not bother me too much at
the time. I believed that integration (at least in my own thinking)
would surely come when I learned more. I was wrong.

After my bachelor, I was on the board of a cultural organization for a
year, and then started the research master behavioural sciences with
good spirits. In the opening week, we had a course about the ‘state of
the art’ of behavioural sciences, led by the philosopher Jan Bransen. In
his lectures, Jan was quite critical of social sciences. I do not know
to what extent I understood the arguments he was making, but his ideas
somehow resonated with me. At the end of one of his lectures (I think it
was the last one of the course), Jan showed us a picture that has
strongly influenced my view of psychological models ever since: the Rube
Goldberg machine (Figure 1).

![](/assets/img/Blog1_figure1.gif)

**Figure 1.**

*A Rube Goldberg Machine*

*Note*. Caption from
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rube_Goldberg_machine> *“Professor Butts
and the Self-Operating Napkin (Originally published in Collier's,
September 26, 1931)*. *Soup spoon (A) is raised to mouth, pulling string
(B) and thereby jerking ladle (C), which throws cracker (D) past toucan
(E). Toucan jumps after cracker and perch (F) tilts, upsetting seeds (G)
into pail (H). Extra weight in pail pulls cord (I), which opens and
ignites lighter (J), setting off skyrocket (K), which causes sickle (L)
to cut string (M), allowing pendulum with attached napkin to swing back
and forth, thereby wiping chin.”*

### Psychological models and the self-operating napkin

According to the Wikipedia page, a Rube Goldberg Machine is ‘*a chain
reaction-type machine or contraption intentionally designed to perform a
simple task in an indirect and (impractically) overly complicated
way*’*.* The term refers to the creations of a cartoonist, Rube
Goldberg, who drew most of his machines in the beginning of the 20th
century. The Wikipedia page also says: ‘*Over the years, the expression
has expanded to mean any confusing or overly complicated system*´ and
‘*\[…\] even scientific hypotheses deemed to be overly complex have been
described by referencing such machines*’. Indeed, during Jan’s lecture,
he playfully suggested that this was perhaps what we were doing in
psychological experiments. I was struck. I immediately saw the
resemblance with the box-and-arrow psychological models, the ‘puzzles’
that excited me so much in the beginning of my 3^rd^ Bachelor year. The
Rube Goldberg Machine that Jan showed us made me suddenly view most
psychological models as absurd as a self-operating napkin (Figure 1).

Let’s illustrate the similarity I saw between Rube Goldberg Machine and
psychological models by looking at Rube Goldberg’s self-operating napkin
(Figure 1) and the reflexive-impulsive model (Figure 2) by Strack and
Deutsch (2004), which is a typical example of the kind of models I
learned about in my studies. The reflexive-impulsive model aims to
explain how perception leads to behavior via two possible pathways
(reflection vs. impulse). In relation to the Rube Goldberg Machine, I
focus on the reflexive pathway of the model, which illustrates how
perception is turned into ‘reasoned action’.

**Figure 2.**

*Reflective-Impulsive Model*. Reprinted from Strack and Deutsch (2004).

![](/assets/img/Blog1_figure2.png)

*Note*. Overview of the reflective–impulsive model. Note that
reflective and impulsive processes are represented by solid or broken
lines, respectively.

The Rube Goldberg Machine and the reflexive pathway of the
reflective-impulsive model are similar in various ways. First, in both
cases, a serial chain reaction of factors is triggered by a certain
input (bringing a spoon to the mouth or perceiving a stimulus,
respectively) that leads to a certain output in the end (a napkin wiping
the chin or the activation of a certain behavior respectively). There
are no further interactions between components. Second, the causal
architecture of both the machine and the model is static and
hard-assembled: there is only one way to get from taking a spoonful of
soup to the napkin wiping the chin, and there is only one way to get
from a perception towards a reasoned action. The process should work in
the same way each and every time. Understanding the mechanisms
underlying the self-operating napkin or reasoned action thus requires an
explanation of the functioning of the separate components. A last
commonality is that the more components one adds between the input and
output, the more complicated the model becomes, which is of course the
fun of a Rube Goldberg machine.

There are also some important differences between the Rube Goldberg
machine and psychological models like the reflexive-impulsive model. The
Rube Goldberg machine has directly observable components, while the
components of the reflexive-impulsive model (e.g., ‘reasoning’) are not
directly observable. The Rube Goldberg machine has a clear mechanism in
the form of Newtonian physics, which explains how the machine should
work. With one relatively simple mathematical formula, one should be
able to know exactly how the force by which the soup-eater moves the
spoon determines the force by which the napkin moves past the
soup-eater’s mouth (assuming that the toucan always has appetite for a
cracker). In psychological models, the mechanisms by which the
components influence each other are generally unknown. Lastly, the
methodology to study the components of a Rube Goldberg machine or a
psychological model like the reflexive-impulsive model are vastly
different. For the Rube Goldberg machine, one can literally isolate
components to determine the causal architecture of the machine. In the
reflexive-impulsive model, one cannot directly isolate the different
components, but has to infer their role by experimental manipulation
and/or statistical inference.

What struck me as a problem for psychological science was not
necessarily the similarity between a Rube Goldberg machine and a
psychological model, but especially these differences. The ‘invisible’,
non-separable components and lack of directly inferable causal
mechanisms in psychological models makes that empirical studies require
many (currently) untestable auxiliary assumptions and thus cannot
unambiguously evaluate a psychological model. Negative results can then
always be attributed to possibly violated auxiliary assumptions, which
makes it rather hard (or even impossible) to corroborate or falsify a
hypothesis (cf., Hasselman, 2015; Meehl, 2004; Oude Maatman, 2021).
Moreover, psychology’s replication crisis, which was at a peak moment at
the start of my research master (Klein et al., 2018), made me view the
empirical results that were supposed to support psychological models not
only as quite far-fetched (because of the indirect inference), but also
potentially untrustworthy. But apart from these methodological problems,
that may in principle be solvable, the comparison with a Rube Goldberg
machine made me feel that there was something fundamentally wrong with
the general architecture of box-and-arrow type psychological models. I
felt that the science of such models was somehow detached from the ‘real
world’, and this bothered me tremendously.

### More components, interactions and the issue of integration

Of course, psychological models are abstractions, and I do not wish to
insinuate that psychological scientists think that actual psychological
phenomena result from simple Rube Goldberg Machine-like linear
input-output models. For most psychological models, scientists would
agree that different inputs can trigger different workings of the model.
In reality there will always be more components playing a role than the
model will fit. Moreover, different components will not only interact
serially, but also in more complex ways. This can for example be seen in
what Strack and Deutsch (2004) call their ‘complete reflexive-impulsive
model’ (Figure 3), which is both more flexible and more complicated than
the original model. In the complete reflexive-impulsive model, the
reflexive and impulsive pathway are no longer separated, but interact
through various processes. This generates multiple ways to get from
input to output, which can depend on differences in input or
characteristics of the individual who processes the input. The
interactions also introduce possible feedback loops in the model,
thereby increasing the complexity. Finally, the model now also seems to
include part-whole relations, for example with regard to ‘experiential
awareness’.

**Figure 3.**

*Complete reflective-Impulsive model*. Reprinted from Strack and Deutsch
(2004).

![](/assets/img/Blog1_figure3.png)

The complete reflexive-impulsive model thereby looks much less like a
Rube Goldberg Machine than the original model. It is more flexible and
more complicated, which made me view the model as more realistic. Still,
a key similarity with the Rube Goldberg Machine remains: input is
processed into output by a set of components that all have a specific
function. It is the components that ‘do the job’. For a scientific study
of the model, one would want to understand the causal architecture of
the model by isolating specific components and carefully determining
their function. For the case of the complete reflexive-impulsive model,
the inclusion of the interactions has made this even more difficult than
it was for the original reflexive-impulsive model. Although I was
initially quite enthusiastic about such more complicated models, the
feeling remained that there was something ‘off’. Specifically, the two
concerns I had in my third bachelor year reappeared in my thinking.

First, to further improve psychological models, it seemed to me that we
could add components in an infinite regression. I was not the first one
with that thought. In 1993, the year I was born, Guy van Orden asked my
promoter Anna Bosman (student, back then): ‘Did you ever come across a
variable in psychology that does not interact with another one?’ (Bosman
et al., 2013). In the case of a psychological model like the
reflexive-impulsive model, one may thus wonder if more components and
interactions should be added to make the ‘complete model’ even more
complete. Second, before starting the research master I believed that
learning more would help me to integrate the various results and
theories in psychological science (at least in my own understanding).
That did not appear to be the case in the research master. The more I
learned, the further I moved away from such an integration. More
knowledge led only to more divergence in my understanding of
psychological phenomena.

At this point in my research master, my scientific interest was
exhibiting quite some instability. One day I could be really
enthusiastic about a way forward for psychological science, and another
day extremely disappointed when I discovered a new problem with it. This
instability came to a tipping point in the course *Dynamics of Complex
Systems* taught by Fred Hasselman and Maarten Wijnants. With all things
I learned in this fascinating course, my ideas about what was ‘off’ with
typical psychological science became more and more explicit following
from the assumption of *component-dominant dynamics* (Van Orden et al.,
2003).

### Component-dominant dynamics 

A component-dominant system is one in which a set of specific
time-invariant components *dominates* the dynamics of the system. It has
a hard-assembled causal architecture in which the same finite set of
components mediates the relation between input and output always in the
same manner (Wallot & Kelty-Stephen, 2017). A Rube Goldberg machine is
thus a typical component-dominant system. Methodologically,
component-dominance implies that the variance of a measurement can be
partitioned in smaller parts which can be explained by independent
components. Component-dominance thus also allows parallel, instead of
serial, contributions of components, as long as they are independent
from one another (a jigsaw puzzle is thus also a metaphor for a
component-dominant explanation; Olthof et al., 2023). Because of the
assumption of a hard-assembled causal architecture consisting of a
finite set of components, component-dominance promises the type of
integration of research results that I had been longing for during my
education. Component-dominant explanations should in principle be as
easy to connect to each other as two Rube Goldberg machines.

Component-dominance had been the background assumption of all the
psychological box-and-arrow models that I learned so far. Moreover,
component-dominance underlies the methodology of empirical studies in
psychology. Statistically, the component-dominant approach implies
independent and identically distributed data points, as one assumes in
the general linear model (GLM; Wallot & Kelty-Stephen, 2017). This
assumption allows for statistical isolation of components. Variability,
both between- and within-persons is regarded as random noise in the
component-dominant view and should be minimized. Further, the
relationship between a component and the output should be the same for
every individual (homogeneity) and be time-invariant (stationarity), an
assumption known as *ergodicity* (Molenaar, 2004). Component-dominance
thus implies group-to-individual generalizability (Fisher et al., 2018).
In practice, component-dominant research thus aims to explain
psychological phenomena by statistically isolating causal components
with group-level research designs and the GLM, whilst ignoring
individual differences and variation over time.

Component-dominant research has its merit as it has led to the
identification of relevant factors in psychological phenomena (which
often turned out to be many) as well as the development of useful
methodology such as experimental designs, randomized-controlled trails,
and statistics. But when the assumptions of the component-dominant
approach were made explicit during the course *Dynamics of Complex
Systems*, I realized that all my concerns were related to limitations of
the component-dominant framework. The lack of convergence between
different models and results as well as the possible ad infinite
regression of components to be added made me belief that psychological
science may have reached a limit of what component-dominant research can
tell us. This belief was strengthened by the evolution of psychology’s
replication crisis into a ‘theory crisis’, in which several critiques
argued that the replication problem was related to the
component-dominant nature of the research field (Bosman et al., 2013;
Hasselman, 2015; Wallot & Kelty-Stephen, 2017). I was therefore very
happy to learn about an alternative approach to psychological science in
the *Dynamics of Complex Systems* course. This alternative approach was
based on *interaction-dominant dynamics*.

### Interaction-dominant dynamics

In the interaction-dominant perspective, the components that give rise
to a psychological phenomenon should be understood as *interdependent
processes* (i.e., processes that continuously interact with each other)
that coordinate themselves following from the principles of
self-organization (Olthof et al., 2023). This implies that the role
specific factors play is not only determined by intrinsic features of
these factors, but always also by the interactions with countless other
processes within the person and its environment at a specific moment in
time (Wallot & Kelty-Stephen, 2017). As these processes continuously
change on multiple timescales, the contributions of specific processes
are not stable and cannot be isolated. In interaction-dominant dynamics,
it is therefore not possible to reduce a psychological phenomenon to a
set of underlying components, as it is the interdependence between
components that generates the phenomenon. This is similar to how a flock
of birds is generated by the interactions between the birds, which
cannot be understood by taking all birds from the sky and studying them
in isolation.

Assuming interaction-dominance in psychological science thus implies
that we cannot isolate causal effects of independent components by
experimental manipulation or by statistical inference (van Geert, 2019).
Also, without stable components, we can no longer assume
group-to-individual generalizability. Consequently, interaction-dominant
research is very different compared to component-dominant research.
Initially it may seem that one has to give up quite a lot to transition
from the component-dominant to the interaction-dominant paradigm. Still,
as Fred and Maarten showed me in their course, the interaction-dominant
paradigm also has a lot to offer by the use of theory and methods from
the science of complex systems. Complex systems theory and its
associated methods are not aimed at disentangling components in a
system, but exploit the many interactions between all components to
learn about general dynamic features of a certain system. I found this
complex systems approach extremely fascinating and was eager to learn
more. The learning process was far from gradual, as the lectures in the
course and the papers that I read also confused me heavily, but in a
very enjoyable manner. Overall, it felt like a totally different way of
thinking opened up to me and I was terribly excited.

### The return of psychopathology 

For my research master thesis, I contacted Marieke van Rooij, as she was
the only person at the ‘potential supervisor pitches’ who mentioned
something about complex systems. She then recommend me to go to a
symposium organized by Anna Lichtwarck-Aschoff called *General
Principles of Psychopathology and Clinical Change*. The symposium
featured complex systems approaches to psychopathology and clinical
change which were completely new to me. Especially the lecture by Günter
Schiepek was extremely fascinating. I understood almost nothing of it,
but the general impression was mind-blowing: real-time interaction
dynamics, chaos, computational models, phase transitions, attractors,
daily assessment, idiographic methods, and clinical implication all put
together in a talk of 30 minutes or so. Apparently, an
interaction-dominant, complex systems based science of psychopathology
and clinical change existed which already had clinical implications. My
initial interest in psychopathology was revived. Too bad no-one told me
about this in my bachelor education, I thought.

I was very excited when Anna and Marieke told me I could work with them
and Günter for my master thesis and study (precursors of) transitions in
daily self-ratings collected during psychotherapy. This work, which
formed the basis of Chapter 6 of the thesis (Olthof et al., 2020), was
based on hypotheses from transdisciplinary complexity science,
especially from the field of ecology, which was another revival of an
early interest. With all these pieces falling into place, I much enjoyed
the year working on the research master project. Actually, I enjoyed it
so much that I became very much interested in doing a PhD in
psychopathology and clinical change based on the complex systems
approach, which ended up doing with the supervision of Anna
Lichtwarck-Aschoff, Fred Hasselman, Günter Schiepek and Anna Bosman. And
that’s how I got into complexity science.

I thank Anna Bosman, Nina de Boer, Freek Oude Maatman, Anna
Lichtwarck-Aschoff, Olga de Bont and Julia Machielsen for their feedback
on earlier versions of this text.

**References**

Borsboom, D. (2013). Theoretical amnesia. *Open Science Collaboration
Blog*. <http://osc.centerforopenscience.org/category/misc6.html>

Bosman, A. M. T., Cox, R. C. A., Hasselman, F., & Wijnants, M. L.
(2013). From the role of context to the measurement problem: The Dutch
connection pays tribute to Guy Van Orden. *Ecological Psychology*,
*25*(3), 240–247. <https://doi.org/10.1080/10407413.2013.810091>

Fisher, A. J., Medaglia, J. D., & Jeronimus, B. F. (2018). Lack of
group-to-individual generalizability is a threat to human subjects
research. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences*, *115*(27),
E6106-E6115. <https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1711978115>

Hasselman, F. (2015). *Beyond the boundary An analysis of verisimilitude
and causal ontology of scientific claims Ætiologies of developmental
dyslexia as a case in point*. \[Doctoral dissertation, Radboud
University\]. <http://hdl.handle.net/2066/140654>

Molenaar, P. C. (2004). A manifesto on psychology as idiographic
science: Bringing the person back into scientific psychology, this time
forever. *Measurement*, *2*(4), 201-218.
<https://doi.org/10.1207/s15366359mea0204_1>

Olthof, M., Hasselman, F., Strunk, G., van Rooij, M., Aas, B., Helmich,
M. A., ... & Lichtwarck-Aschoff, A. (2020). Critical fluctuations as an
early-warning signal for sudden gains and losses in patients receiving
psychotherapy for mood disorders. *Clinical Psychological Science*,
*8*(1), 25-35.

Olthof, M., Hasselman, F., Oude Maatman, F., Bosman, A. M., &
Lichtwarck-Aschoff, A. (2023). Complexity theory of psychopathology.
*Journal of Psychopathology and Clinical Science*, *132*(3), 314.

Strack, F., & Deutsch, R. (2004). Reflective and impulsive determinants
of social behavior. *Personality and social psychology review*, *8*(3),
220-247.

Van Geert, P. L. C. (2019). Dynamic systems, process and development.
*Human Development*, *63*, 153–179. <https://doi.org/10.1159/000503825>

Van Orden, G. C., Holden, J. G., & Turvey, M. T. (2003).
Self-organization of cognitive performance. *Journal of experimental
psychology: General*, *132*(3), 331.

Wallot, S., & Kelty-Stephen, D. G. (2017). Interaction-dominant
causation in mind and brain, and its implication for questions of
generalization and replication. *Minds and Machines, 28*, 353-374.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-017-9455-0>
